---
title: Amazon and the Games Industry
date: 2026-01-24T12:00:00-08:00
description: My experience as the only engineer to kill GameSparks twice, and what Amazon misunderstood about the games industry.
tags: [amazon, games, career, aws, gamesparks]
coverImage: /images/blog/gamesparks-cover.jpg
---

As a System Development Engineer at Amazon, I am the only engineer that killed GameSparks twice. I worked for Amazon in the AWS for Games (or GameTech) space from May 2021 to December 2023 and my lifecycle aligns with the existence of a never launched AWS service called Amazon GameSparks. I was hired in April 2020, the beginning of the dark times, for Kinesis teams. I left my position with Kinesis for a position in the San Francisco Bay Area so I could be with my then-girlfriend-now-wife. Though I will admit that I was ecstatic that the games portion of the company wanted to have me on the team. I grew up loving games. Games are the reason I am in my career to begin with, a dream come true. After just over a year with the company, I transferred to the Legacy GameSparks team.

This article is most importantly an opinion piece. I am informed by my direct experiences with the team and love of the games industry. I did interact with those who made acquisition decisions, but I had no influence at that point in my career. This was my personal journey through my employment at Amazon and how I learned to observe the corporate view of the games industry more directly.

## Replacing GameSparks

The interview process was extremely positive, and I have nothing but positive experiences with any individual I encountered during my time with the organization. I was hired under the pretense that Amazon was shutting down GameSparks and I was to keep the lights on and work on the process to shut down everything when the day finally came. Once that was completed I would have a position on the Amazon GameSparks team as a Software Development Engineer.

Amazon announced in July 2021 at their Game Developer's Conference AWS Keynote[^1] that AWS was building a new AWS Service called Amazon GameSparks that would be a native service replacement for the acquired company. Roughly 2 weeks before the announcement, I was joining the team with that information in tow. The announcement did carry the end-of-life for the acquired company as well, but remained focused on building a new audience for existing AWS customers. There was a key focus on the Legacy GameSparks team to deliver a data export tool for customers to shift their data to other services such as Amazon GameSparks as well as compatibility for competitors should they choose to use them.

The direction to offer the shift to competitors was a welcome, albeit tactically confusing move that I asked about almost immediately. The move that I would have expected was a direct conversion to the new service, where we could offer a managed migration and maintain our customer base. The direction was chosen because even this early in the lifecycle of the new service, Amazon GameSparks was not going to launch with feature parity.

The question then became, why would we even announce a replacement if we can't launch with feature parity? To me that just encourages the loss of customers. Amazon could not reasonably afford to keep Legacy GameSparks (which I will use to refer to the older service from here) operating. I was led to believe a migration effort was planned to modernize the existing infrastructure. That effort was cancelled in favor of building Amazon GameSparks and never made any meaningful progress.

Legacy GameSparks had accumulated significant tech debt and architectural inconsistencies. Amazon GameSparks was being built as a native AWS service, available in the AWS console and CDK. Because of the architectural differences between the two, no code could be reused. Legacy GameSparks was not connected to AWS at a billing level, so customer conversion would have required converting them to AWS accounts entirely. I also believe there was a hesitance to attempt this and can't even imagine what a legal headache that might involve. GameSparks had contracts with some developers that agreed for service to be functional to certain dates, including past the deprecation date. The deprecation date had to be more focused on removing customer access than infrastructure shutdown. Legacy GameSparks remained publicly accessible until September 30, 2022 [^2] but customer traffic and infrastructure remained until sometime the following summer.

## Deleting GameSparks

My single largest contribution to operating cost reduction came from identifying unused infrastructure resources that weren't being cleaned up. This simple[^3] change managed to significantly reduce operating costs. Even once surfacing this issue with management, detailing the cost benefits, it was deemed too risky to act on until after the deprecation date, despite my pushback. This wasn't tracked earlier because monitoring quality wasn't being maintained or reviewed regularly. Costs were just ignored or accepted by management as a fact of life while the service was in KTLO (Keep The Lights On). This reduction wouldn't have been pivotal in making a different business decision if caught earlier.

I worked on GameLift for some away-team work to get my feet wet with the team and to feel out if I would gel with being a Software Development Engineer. After not being an SDE for 3 years, it was clear to me and almost definitely the GameLift team that I was not very good at it. I needed a lot of help to come close to the SDE quality bar that Amazon expected. My development was focused on CI/CD, automations, web technologies, and infrastructure. To remain successful at Amazon, I chose to stay on that path at the cost of leaving GameTech once the GameSparks family was completely shuttered.

As the last bits of Legacy GameSparks went offline, I joined the Amazon GameSparks team finally. That same week, we had a state of GameTech meeting to catch everyone up on the progress of all the teams. I was not aware if this was out of the ordinary as I had been silo'd into Legacy GameSparks for so long. During this call, it was announced that Amazon GameSparks, whose launch was initially months away, was going to be shuttered. All employees would be assigned new teams, some to geo-spatial teams (which caused at least one engineer to leave that I am aware of), some to GameLift, some to GameLift Streams and some to a new team to handle the shutdown of Amazon GameSparks, which is where I fell. This team would handle the destruction of Amazon GameSparks like the Legacy GameSparks team before it. It made me the only engineer with two GameSparks deaths under their belt.

The destruction of Amazon GameSparks was less complicated legally as we didn't have any obligation to maintain infrastructure for specific customers. The lack of contracts enabled us to destroy infrastructure as soon as our date had passed. It was able to be completed using the infrastructure-as-code tools. I was able to be involved as the lead engineer and drive the direction and execution of this shutdown. I was able to use my prior experience to expedite some milestones and worked with internal teams to remove any customer access.

## Losing GameSparks

Amazon getting into the Games Industry makes sense because the games industry at this point is an extension of the tech industry. It's the highest-grossing form of entertainment which is enticing for the infinite growth for shareholder value[^4]. The biggest games have online components that they already supply cloud infrastructure for. Other tech companies have joined in as well, with varying degrees of success from the likes of Microsoft, Google, Apple and Netflix.

All calls with management would start with small talk about what games we were playing, and thoughts on them if you had them to share. They genuinely cared about games and were developers themselves at times in their careers. My observation was that they were an older guard of game developers, where timelines were maybe 3 years max for a new release to come out, early 2000s when online games were in their infancy. Around 2010 is where I started to notice the shift in how games would take the better half of a decade, and sometimes even more, to release. This most likely had misinformed their decision-making. Decisions that would impact deliverables and market expectations.

My understanding of the situation was that there was not enough traction for the service during the pre-release period. Amazon's game developer partners weren't committed to using the service pre-release, so they couldn't guarantee a steady stream of income for the service. Game development, during this time, was already showing to be taking longer than it did in the decades prior [^5]. You regularly won't see new games or sequels for single development studios within 5 years for a large bulk of the industry, barring some exceptions. This service was to aid live-service games, which already released few and far between. These games had short lifespans if they didn't meet the very high bars like Fortnite or Apex Legends. Why would a game developer commit to using a not-yet released service for a game that has years of development and years of ongoing support ahead of it?

Fortnite impacts and skews market perception of the games industry at all companies, not just Amazon. They become the only target for developers and publishers to pull player attention away. In Amazon's case, it appeared as though the bets being placed were to be the service that facilitates the next Fortnite. Build the service to capture the unicorn client and it funds the entire venture. According to Circana's Mat Piscatella, "The biggest competitor to any new video game is Fortnite. I will die on that hill, no matter what it is, because you have to fight Fortnite before you fight anything else to get your game seen and purchased"[^6]. Corporations chase infinite growth. They can either fight for scraps of the player base, players more likely to try new games but never worth much money. Or they can go for the king and try to capture a larger share. Fortnite isn't unstoppable, but Epic would have to make their own missteps to lose their players before another game could meaningfully court the average Fortnite player. 

To have a market of sustainable live service games to make money off of, they have to live long enough for the cost of development and backend support to be matched by the game's revenue. That is just an uphill battle for every developer. The service took too long to develop in an industry where games take too long to develop. And the potential for customer acquisition is a small portion of the market at large unless they find a unicorn.

Amazon does have a place in the games industry. GameLift is considered a success even from its lifetime exceeding that of the GameSparks', among actual metrics[^7]. Luna, a video game streaming subscription service, also remains active since the Google Stadia days that had a significantly shorter lifespan. Beyond AWS for Games, AWS as a platform can potentially host game developers' environments or service infrastructure without active involvement from the company itself. Amazon acquired Twitch and managed to outlast competitors like Mixer, Microsoft's attempt to get into the content creator streaming portion of the market.

Amazon acquired GameSparks in 2017, as announced via the GameSparks blog in 2018[^8]. By the time I joined the team 3 years after the acquisition, there were two remaining GameSparks employees on the team. When asked about how the decision was made to purchase the company, the IP was the most important to Amazon. GameSparks as an IP has not been used by Amazon since December 2023, 6 years after the acquisition. All GameSparks related domains now point to GameLift as of the time of this writing.[^9]

Before GameSparks, I would get more emotionally attached to the work I did. Cutting features or plans that didn't work or make sense as environments morphed was hard. The work I created felt important. GameSparks made everything feel more emotionally detached as I became the team's closer. That is arguably valuable for the work-life separation but it felt wrong at the time. Corporate decisions doomed GameSparks and those decisions desensitized me to the realities of software development. Moreover, losing GameSparks meant losing my place in the games industry and didn't afford me any closure afterwards. I had to find work in other organizations within Amazon once my role was complete, and outside of Amazon shortly after.

[^1]: [Amazon GameSparks Announcement on the AWS Blog](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/gametech/amazon-gamesparks-is-coming/) and [GDC Talk](https://youtu.be/ujwKuj3pQ3g)

[^2]: [GameSparks Timeline](https://pages.awscloud.com/GLOBAL-ln-DL-IMM-ISC-GMT-gamesparks-2021-learn.html)

[^3]: Apologies for the vagueness, but the cleanup was more tedious than it sounds

[^4]: [60.685b for Video Games](https://bsky.app/profile/matpiscatella.bsky.social/post/3mczdup376s2b) and [Movies closing around 35b](https://deadline.com/2026/01/global-box-office-2025-report-hollywood-studio-rankings-1236660512/#:~:text=The%20global%20box%20office%20in,production%20did%20over%20%242B.) in 2025

[^5]: [Why do games take longer to make?](https://www.gamedeveloper.com/production/what-s-the-real-reason-games-are-taking-longer-to-make-)

[^6]: [Windows Central Report](https://www.windowscentral.com/gaming/fortnite-biggest-competitor-new-game-analyst) covering [Mat Piscatella's interview on Kinda Funny Gamescast](https://www.youtube.com/live/lrPeLqcty4I)

[^7]: [GameLift Userbase](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/gametech/amazon-gamelift-achieves-100-million-concurrently-connected-users-per-game/)

[^8]: [Direct source is no longer available, thanks to me for shutting that website hosting down. Sorry](https://techcrunch.com/2018/03/05/amazon-confirms-that-it-has-acquired-gamesparks/)

[^9]: Even https://appsparks.com and https://games-as-a-service.com